Let's talk about embedding C++ into Excel using the xll add-in library

The basic idea is to write an add-in that takes arguments for a constructor
and return the pointer provided by new. If any of the constructor arguments
change the function will be called again and a different pointer will be returned.
The original object should be deleted, but how?

We could write another add-in function that calls delete and try to remember to call that before changing any of the constructor arguments.
Good luck with that. 

The xll::handle class solves this problem by calling delete for you.

Start by including the xll.h header and use everything in the xll namespace

You can include header files for any any C++ library,
but let's define a simple generic base class for storing a C++ type. 





The base class constructor takes a semiregular type and tucks it away.
It can be accessed using get and set.
The destructor is virtual because we want to inherit from base.





Use the AddIn class to specify information Excel needs to register a function.
The function returns a handle by calling the C++ function xll underscore base
that will be called backslash XLL dot BASE in Excel. 

The function has one argument that is a pointer to an OPER. full stop

An OPER a C++ class that correspoinds to a cell in an Excel spreadsheet. It can be a number, string, error, boolean, ... some other things... or a 2-dimensional range of cells.

Functions that return a handle must be uncalced.
This tells Excel the function has side effects. 
In our case, we look at the value in the calling cell to get the old pointer and delete it before returning the new handle.
Excel function names starting with a backslash indicate a handle will be returned.
But this is a convention, not a requirement.

All C++ functions registered with Excel must be declared WINAPI.
[This is an artifact of the original versions of Excel being written in Pascal.]
If you forget to do this you will get no warnings, only strange crashes that involving call stack corruption.

The first line of the body of the function implementation requires pragma XLLEXPORT.
Unlike Unix, Windows does not make functions visible outside of shared libraries by default.
If you forget to do this you *will* get a warning when you load the add-in.

The xll::handle class is similar to a std::unique_ptr.
It has a constructor taking a handle returned by new.
The handle reference exactly one object and the object is deleted when the handle goes out of scope.
The handle member function `get` returns the handle of the object.






To call a member function of a C++ object you must provide a handle.
The Excel function XLL dot base dot get calls xll underscore base underscore get and returns a pointer to the OPER it holds.
The function takes one argument, the handle returned by backslash xll dot base.

The handle constructor converts the handle to a pointer to the object.
Unrecognized handles are converted to null pointers that can be detected with operator bool.
The handle arrow operator returns a pointer to base that is used to call the get member function..
The xll library has a predefined object ErrNA corresponding to #N/A.
Use this to communicate to Excel that something went wrong.

If you are nervous about returning the address of an object from a function, you should be.
If the object only exists in the call stack of the function its destructor will be called on function exit, and the caller will get a pointer to garbage.
In our case, the OPER has been tucked away in the base<OPER> object created by \XLL.BASE.
It exists as long as the handle is in scope. 

Note h.get() returns a handle to base<OPER> but h arrow get() returns a pointer to the base object.





XLL.BASE.SET illustrates how to call a member function that takes arguments.
Note that add-in functions always take and return *pointers* to OPER's.
base::set has void return but Excel wants a cookie so we return the handle.
We could use this as an argument to XLL.BASE.GET to return the value that was just set.





The derived class inherits from base and stores a second item of a generic type.
Note neither class involves any Excel specifics. 







The add-in for \XLL.DERIVED creates a derived object taking two arguments.
The pointer from the new derived constructor is stored as a base handle.

The handle can be used in calls to XLL.BASE.GET and XLL.BASE.GET.







To call a member function of a derived class use the handle<base> constructor to get the pointer.
The handle member function `as<derived>` calls dynamic_cast to detect if it is a pointer to a derived class.





As you've probably figured out by now, handles are 64-bit floating point doubles.
The bits in the double are the same as the bits in the pointer.
This reduces the conversion to a couple of machine instructions.
 
Some people don't like seeing funny looking floating point numbers in their spreadsheet.
You can use handle<T>::codec to encode and decode handles to more pleasant looking strings.
The codec specifies a prefix and suffix string. The handle is converted to a 16 character
hexidecimal string sandwitched beteen them.
Use encode to convert handles to a string and decode to convert strings to handles.






Anything you can do in Excel by hand can be done using the Excel function.
The first argument to Excel() is the function or macro number
The subsequent arguments are described in the documenation.

Create an Excel AddIn macro called HANDLE.TEST that calls xll_handle_test.
Macros return an int they should be TRUE on success or FALSE if something goes wrong.




The macro command xl*c*Formula enters OPER values and formulas into a cell..

The macro function xl*f*GetCell gets information about cells.
You must read the documentation for GET.CELL to determine the magic number 5 retrieves the cell contents 

Likewise the magic number 1 creates a new worksheet.




Enter 1.23 in cell A1
Create a handle to a base pointer using the cell above.
Get its value using the handle.

Note: xlfFormula requires R1C1 references.

Replace 1.23 in A1 by the string foo and make sure the call to \xll.base and xll.base.get work.





Add two argument for the call to \XLL.DERIVED in A5 and A6,
Call \xll.derived
Make sure xll.base.get works with derived.
and Make sure xll.derived.get2 works.






Create a base object with an encoded handle.
Make sure the prefix is correct.
Note xlfLeft is the Excel LEFT function.

Call base.get to check decoding works.


[Switch to spread sheet. Step through cells. Note leading 0's]



This is everything you need to know to embed C++ in Excel using handles.




Let's step though the macro using the debugger.

If you're still here, let's do a code review on the details of how xll::handle works.

The xll:handle class only depends on xlCoerce and xlfCaller.